## Student ID: IT17009164
## Name: V.R.B.Mahanthe
## Research topic: Airport Gate Allocation Optimization

# Implementation

## 1. Genetic Programming (GP) approach

GP is an evolutionary approach that processes an initial set of solutions (population)
to produce a set of new optimal solutions, with the help of genetic operators: (1)
selection, (2) crossover and (3) mutation. The optimum solution for a problem is
progressively evolved and converged from the initial set of solutions There are five
major steps in genetic programming process:

 1. Initial population – a population is generated initially with ‘n’ number of solutions; P(0)

 2. Fitness function – fitness value of the current population P(t) is calculated by passing every individual solution ‘s’ through the fitness function F(s)

 3. Selection – (t+1)th population P(t+1), is produced by selecting the ‘i’ fittest solutions (parents) from current population P(t)

 4. Offspring – new solutions (children) are generated using genetic operators (crossover and mutation) from F(t+1)

 5. Termination - repeat from Step-2 until an optimum solution is found or the termination criteria is met.

Every individual is a solution to the problem at a given time but may not be the
optimum solution. After the initial population is generated, a fitness function
determines the fittest solutions. The best n solutions are selected for the next generation
population. Then genetic operations are applied to a set of selected solutions, and new
solutions are generated. The genetic operators: (1) mutation and (2) crossover are used
to generate offsprings. Crossover and mutation are used to diversify the solutions by
exchanging the genes between both the parents and within the solutions, respectively.
Crossover happens more frequently, and mutation happens less frequently, ultimately
towards convergence. The population is frequently updated with the newly produced
solutions. This process is repeated, and it is terminated when the predefined ‘x’ number
of generations are reached. The solution having the highest value for the fitness in the
final generation is chosen as the optimum solution.

This platform determines the optimal gate allocation, considering generating
maximum profit while minimizing passenger inconvenience. In such a case, assigning
a pier bay for a bay minimizes passenger inconveniences, compared to assigning a
remote bay. Therefore, the optimization goal of this module is to assign a pier bay as
the gate for a flight, whenever possible. Also, constraints are used to ensure that at a 
given time a gate could only be allocated to a single flight and a flight should only be 
assigned to a single gate, respectively. All flights are sorted in the order of arrival, 
and each flight is assigned a flight number. All the gates (pier bays and remote bays) are 
assigned a gate number. Next, the genetic operators are applied to Chromosomes to produce 
offsprings. Onepoint crossover and mutation are performed to generate off-springs. This 
process isrepeated, and it is terminated when the predefined ‘x’ number of generations are
reached. The solution having the highest value of fitness in the final generation is
chosen as the optimum solution.

## 2. Iterated Local Search (ILS) approach

In what follows, the procedures of ILS implemented in a step vise appraoch.
 1. Initial solution; s0 – The initial candidate solution is generated by a random method which takes into account the gate occupancy rate.

 2. Local Search – A local search is performed on s0 , s* is output.

    The current candidate solution is used to generate the neighborhood by
    changing 2 components of the solution. The The neighbourhood is then
    evaluated to find the best solution with the highest fitness value. The best
    solution is chosen as the current neighbour - s*.

 3. Pertubation – s* is pertubed to generate s|

    The proecss in this phase is inside the main loop of the algorithm. As seen in
    mutation operator in Genetic algorithms, the same mutation procedures are
    undergone in the process of pertubation here.

 4. Local Search – s|

    is undergone a local search to produce a new candidate
    solution- s*|
    The solution which was subjected to Pertubation then undergoes a Local Search
    again. We get the current solution S*' The procedures used in Local Search are
    the same as mentioned above.

 5. Acceptance criterion – s* is replaced with the best candidate solution among s| and s*| .

    The better solution is then again chosen by an Acceptance criteria which checks
    the current solution against the previous candidate solution with the help of a
    fitness function.

This process is repeated from Step – 3 to Step 5 until a termination condition is met.
The termination criteria can be the number of iterations the loop undergoes or a where
there is no improvement in the solutions in the search space. As in genetic algorithms, 
Every individual is a candidate solution to the problem at a given time but may not be 
the optimum solution preffered. This property can be identified as a significant advantage 
of using sub optimal computing over optimal computing due to the haevy time consumption 
of optimal computing procedures. It is always guaranteed that the user is ended up with 
a solution regardless of a complete run on the algorithm. As mentioned previously in the 
GP approach section, the problem is the same with the objective being the assignment of 
a pier bay as the gate for a flight, whenever possible. Constraints are considered to 
ensure that at a given time a gate could only be allocated to a single flight and a flight 
should only be assigned to a single gate, respectively. All flights are sorted in the 
order of arrival, and each flight is assigned a flight number. Allthe gates 
(pier bays and remote bays) are assigned a gate number.
 